README.md, before:

[![Latest release](https://img.shields.io/github/release/jedisct1/piknik.svg)](https://github.com/jedisct1/piknik/releases/latest)
[![Build status](https://travis-ci.com/jedisct1/piknik.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.com/jedisct1/piknik?branch=master)
![CodeQL scan](https://github.com/jedisct1/piknik/workflows/Code%20scanning%20-%20action/badge.svg)

# Piknik

Copy/paste anything over the network!

[[watch a demo on Asciinema](https://asciinema.org/a/80708)] -
[[download the source code / binaries](https://github.com/jedisct1/piknik/releases/latest)]

![Piknik](https://raw.github.com/jedisct1/piknik/master/piknik.png)

Ever needed a copy/paste clipboard that works over the network?

Piknik seamlessly and securely transfers URLs, code snippets, documents, virtually anything between arbitrary hosts.

No SSH needed, and hosts can sit behind NAT gateways, on different networks.

Fill in the clipboard ("copy") with whatever comes in to the standard input:

```sh
$ pkc
clipboard content
```

Magically retrieve that content from any other host having Piknik installed with the same configuration:

```sh
$ pkp
clipboard content
```

Boom.

Obviously, it can be used to transfer files as well:

```sh
pkc < kitten.gif
pkp > kittencopy.gif
```

```sh
tar cvf - *.txt | pkc
pkp | tar xvf -
```

In order to work around firewalls/NAT gatways, the clipboard content transits over TCP via a staging server.

Nothing transits without end-to-end encryption; the server cannot learn much about what the clipboard actually contains.

Data can be shared between different operating systems, including MacOS, Linux and Windows.

## Installation

### Option 1: use precompiled binaries

Precompiled binaries for MacOS, Linux (i386, x86_64, ARM), Win32, Win64, DragonflyBSD, NetBSD and FreeBSD can be downloaded here:
<https://github.com/jedisct1/piknik/releases/latest>

### Option 2 (on MacOS): use Homebrew

```sh
brew install piknik
```

### Option 3: compile the source code

This project is written in Go.

Go >= 1.24 is required, as well as the following incantation:

```sh
go build
```

The `piknik` executable file should then be available in current path.

## Setup

Piknik requires a bunch of keys. Generate them all with

```sh
piknik -genkeys
```

This generates random keys (highly recommended).

You will need to copy parts (not all!) of that command's output to a `piknik.toml` configuration file.

A temporary alternative is to derive the keys from a password. The same password will always generate the same set of keys, on all platforms. In order to do so, add the `-password` switch:

```sh
piknik -genkeys -password
```

The output of the `-genkeys` command is all you need to build a configuration file.

Only copy the section for servers on the staging server. Only copy the section for clients on the clients.

Is a host gonna act both as a staging server and as a client? Ponder on it before copying the "hybrid" section, but it's there, just in case.

The default location for the configuration file is `~/.piknik.toml`. With the exception of Windows, where dot-files are not so common. On that platform, the file is simply called `piknik.toml`.

Sample configuration file for a staging server:

```toml
Listen = "0.0.0.0:8075"         # Edit appropriately
Psk    = "bf82bab384697243fbf616d3428477a563e33268f0f2307dd14e7245dd8c995d"
SignPk = "0c41ca9b0a1b5fe4daae789534e72329a93a352a6ad73d6f1d368d8eff37271c"

# Optional streaming limits (defaults shown):
# MaxStreamBytes    = 10737418240   # 10 GiB
# MaxStreamDuration = 86400         # 24 hours, in seconds
# MaxWaitingPullers = 100
```

Sample configuration file for clients:

```toml
Connect   = "127.0.0.1:8075"    # Edit appropriately
Psk       = "bf82bab384697243fbf616d3428477a563e33268f0f2307dd14e7245dd8c995d"
SignPk    = "0c41ca9b0a1b5fe4daae789534e72329a93a352a6ad73d6f1d368d8eff37271c"
SignSk    = "cecf1d92052f7ba87da36ac3e4a745b64ade8f9e908e52b4f7cd41235dfe7481"
EncryptSk = "2f530eb85e59c1977fce726df9f87345206f2a3d40bf91f9e0e9eeec2c59a3e4"
```

Do not use these, uh? Get your very own keys with the `piknik -genkeys` command.
Edit the `Connect` and `Listen` properties to reflect the staging server IP and port.
And `chmod 600 ~/.piknik.toml` might not be a bad idea.

Don't like the default config file location? Use the `-config` switch.

## Usage (staging server)

Run the following command on the staging server (or use `runit`, `openrc`, `systemd`, whatever to run it as a background service):

```sh
piknik -server
```

The staging server has to be publicly accessible. At the very least, it must be reachable by the clients over TCP with the port you specify in the configuration.

Commands without a valid API key (present in the client configuration file) will be rejected by the server.

## Usage (clients)

```sh
piknik -copy
```

Copy the standard input to the clipboard.

```sh
piknik -paste
```

Retrieve the content of the clipboard and spit it to the standard output.
`-paste` is actually a no-op. This is the default action if `-copy` was not specified.

```sh
piknik -move
```

Retrieve the content of the clipboard, spit it to the standard output
and clear the clipboard. Not necessarily in this order.
Only one lucky client will have the privilege to see the content.

That's it.

Feed it anything. Text, binary data, whatever. As long as it fits in memory.

## Streaming mode

Piknik also supports real-time streaming between hosts. One or more receivers connect and wait, then a sender streams data that all receivers get simultaneously.

Start a receiver on one or more hosts:

```sh
piknik -pull > received_data
```

Then stream from the sender:

```sh
piknik -push < data_to_send
```

Or pipe a live process:

```sh
tar cf - /important/stuff | piknik -push
```

All connected receivers get the same stream. Only one sender can be active at a time.

Streaming works like copy/paste: everything is end-to-end encrypted and signed. The server just relays opaque bytes.

### Content identifiers

The optional `-cid` flag binds a label into the stream's key derivation, so both sides must agree on the same value for decryption to succeed:

```sh
piknik -pull -cid "deploy-v42" > payload    # receiver
piknik -push -cid "deploy-v42" < payload    # sender
```

The label is never sent over the wire. If the sender and receiver use different labels, the receiver will fail with a decryption error.

The `PIKNIK_CONTENT_ID` environment variable can be used instead of `-cid`.

### Trust model

Stream output should be considered tentative until the process exits with code 0. A zero exit status means all chunks were authenticated via AEAD and the complete stream signature was verified. A non-zero exit means the stream was incomplete or tampered with. Pipelines should check the exit status before trusting the output.

## Suggested shell aliases

Wait. Where are the `pkc` and `pkp` commands mentioned earlier?

Sample shell aliases:

```sh
# pko <content> : copy <content> to the clipboard
pko() {
    echo "$*" | piknik -copy
}

# pkf <file> : copy the content of <file> to the clipboard
pkf() {
    piknik -copy < $1
}

# pkc : read the content to copy to the clipboard from STDIN
alias pkc='piknik -copy'

# pkp : paste the clipboard content
alias pkp='piknik -paste'

# pkm : move the clipboard content
alias pkm='piknik -move'

# pkz : delete the clipboard content
alias pkz='piknik -copy < /dev/null'

# pkfr [<dir>] : send a whole directory to the clipboard, as a tar archive
pkfr() {
    tar czpvf - ${1:-.} | piknik -copy
}

# pkpr : extract clipboard content sent using the pkfr command
alias pkpr='piknik -paste | tar xzpvf -'

# pkpush : stream stdin to connected pullers
alias pkpush='piknik -push'

# pkpull : wait and receive a stream to stdout
alias pkpull='piknik -pull'
```

## Piknik integration in third-party packages

* The [Piknik package for Atom](https://atom.io/packages/piknik)
allows copying/pasting text between hosts running the Atom text editor.
* The [Piknik package for Visual Studio Code](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=jedisct1.piknik)
allows copying/pasting text between hosts running the Visual Studio Code text editor.

## Use cases

Use it to:

* Securely send passwords, API keys, URLs from one host to another
* Share a clipboard with your teammates (which can be a lot of fun)
* Copy data from/to isolated VMs, without the VMWare tools or shared volumes (great for unsupported operating systems and malware sandboxes)
* Copy files from/to a Windows machine, without Samba or SSH
* Transfer data between hosts sitting behind firewalls/NAT gateways
* Easily copy configuration files to multiple hosts
* Start a slow download at the office, retrieve it later at home
* Quickly backup a file to the cloud before messing with it
* ...and more!

## Protocol

### Common definitions

```text
k: API key
ek: 256-bit symmetric encryption key
ekid: encryption key id encoded as a 64-bit little endian integer
m: plaintext
ct: XChaCha20 ek,n (m)
Hk,s: BLAKE2b(domain="PK", key=k, salt=s, size=32)
Len(x): x encoded as a 64-bit little endian unsigned integer
n: random 192-bit nonce
r: random 256-bit client nonce
r': random 256-bit server nonce
ts: Unix timestamp as a 64-bit little endian integer
Sig: Ed25519
v: 6 (copy/paste/move), 7 (streaming)
```

### Copy (v6)

```text
-> v || r || h0
h0 := Hk,0(v || r)

<- v || r' || h1
h1 := Hk,1(v || r' || h0)

-> 'S' || h2 || Len(ekid || n || ct) || ts || s || ekid || n || ct
s := Sig(ekid || n || ct)
h2 := Hk,2(h1 || 'S' || ts || s)

<- Hk,3(h2)
```

### Move/Paste (v6)

```text
Move:  opcode := 'M'
Paste: opcode := 'G'

-> v || r || h0
h0 := Hk,0(v || r)

<- v || r' || h1
h1 := Hk,1(v || r' || H0)

-> opcode || h2
h2 := Hk,2(h1 || opcode)

<- Hk,3(h2 || ts || s) || Len(ekid || n || ct) || ts || s || ekid || n || ct
s := Sig(ekid || n || ct)
```

### Streaming (v7)

Streaming uses protocol version 7. The handshake is the same as v6, but the
opcode is `P` (push) or `L` (pull) and the data flow is chunked.

Additional definitions:

```text
AEAD: XChaCha20-Poly1305
np: random 128-bit nonce prefix (also serves as stream identifier)
streamKey: BLAKE2b-256(key=ek, person="pkv7-stream-key",
           input=ts || ekid || np || uint16(len(cid)) || cid)
chunkNonce(i): np || uint64_le(i)     (24 bytes)
cidBind: BLAKE2b-256(key=ek, person="pk-v7-cid-bind",
         input=uint16(len(cid)) || cid)    if cid present
         32 zero bytes                     if cid absent
```

Push (sender):

```text
-> v=7 || r || h0                       (handshake)
<- v=7 || r' || h1

-> 'P' || h2                            (opcode auth)
h2 := Hk,2(h1 || 'P')

-> ts || ekid || np                     (stream header, 32 bytes)

-> uint32_le(len) || AEAD.Seal(streamKey, chunkNonce(0), chunk0)
-> uint32_le(len) || AEAD.Seal(streamKey, chunkNonce(1), chunk1)
...                                     (data frames, len=1..65536)

-> uint32_le(0) || Sig(transcriptHash)  (end frame)
```

Pull (receiver):

```text
-> v=7 || r || h0                       (handshake)
<- v=7 || r' || h1

-> 'L' || h2                            (opcode auth, then wait)
h2 := Hk,2(h1 || 'L')

<- ts || ekid || np                     (stream header)
<- uint32_le(len) || sealed_chunk       (data frames)
...
<- uint32_le(0) || signature            (end frame)
```

The transcript hash covers:

```text
transcriptHash := BLAKE2b-256(person="pk-v7-transcript",
    v(1) || 'P'(1) || ts(8) || ekid(8) || np(16) || cidBind(32)
    || for each chunk: chunkIndex(8) || chunkLen(4) || sealedChunk(len+16)
)
```

All integers are little-endian. The content identifier (`-cid`) is never
transmitted on the wire; it is bound into key derivation and the transcript
hash so that both sides must agree on the same label.

## License

[ISC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISC_license).

## Credits

Piknik diagram by [EasyPi](https://easypi.herokuapp.com/copy-paste-anything-over-network/).

Commit message:

Fix streaming push: reject when no pullers are connected

README.md, after:

[![Latest release](https://img.shields.io/github/release/jedisct1/piknik.svg)](https://github.com/jedisct1/piknik/releases/latest)
[![Build status](https://travis-ci.com/jedisct1/piknik.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.com/jedisct1/piknik?branch=master)
![CodeQL scan](https://github.com/jedisct1/piknik/workflows/Code%20scanning%20-%20action/badge.svg)

# Piknik

Copy/paste anything over the network!

[[watch a demo on Asciinema](https://asciinema.org/a/80708)] -
[[download the source code / binaries](https://github.com/jedisct1/piknik/releases/latest)]

![Piknik](https://raw.github.com/jedisct1/piknik/master/piknik.png)

Ever needed a copy/paste clipboard that works over the network?

Piknik seamlessly and securely transfers URLs, code snippets, documents, virtually anything between arbitrary hosts.

No SSH needed, and hosts can sit behind NAT gateways, on different networks.

Fill in the clipboard ("copy") with whatever comes in to the standard input:

```sh
$ pkc
clipboard content
```

Magically retrieve that content from any other host having Piknik installed with the same configuration:

```sh
$ pkp
clipboard content
```

Boom.

Obviously, it can be used to transfer files as well:

```sh
pkc < kitten.gif
pkp > kittencopy.gif
```

```sh
tar cvf - *.txt | pkc
pkp | tar xvf -
```

In order to work around firewalls/NAT gatways, the clipboard content transits over TCP via a staging server.

Nothing transits without end-to-end encryption; the server cannot learn much about what the clipboard actually contains.

Data can be shared between different operating systems, including MacOS, Linux and Windows.

## Installation

### Option 1: use precompiled binaries

Precompiled binaries for MacOS, Linux (i386, x86_64, ARM), Win32, Win64, DragonflyBSD, NetBSD and FreeBSD can be downloaded here:
<https://github.com/jedisct1/piknik/releases/latest>

### Option 2 (on MacOS): use Homebrew

```sh
brew install piknik
```

### Option 3: compile the source code

This project is written in Go.

Go >= 1.24 is required, as well as the following incantation:

```sh
go build
```

The `piknik` executable file should then be available in current path.

## Setup

Piknik requires a bunch of keys. Generate them all with

```sh
piknik -genkeys
```

This generates random keys (highly recommended).

You will need to copy parts (not all!) of that command's output to a `piknik.toml` configuration file.

A temporary alternative is to derive the keys from a password. The same password will always generate the same set of keys, on all platforms. In order to do so, add the `-password` switch:

```sh
piknik -genkeys -password
```

The output of the `-genkeys` command is all you need to build a configuration file.

Only copy the section for servers on the staging server. Only copy the section for clients on the clients.

Is a host gonna act both as a staging server and as a client? Ponder on it before copying the "hybrid" section, but it's there, just in case.

The default location for the configuration file is `~/.piknik.toml`. With the exception of Windows, where dot-files are not so common. On that platform, the file is simply called `piknik.toml`.

Sample configuration file for a staging server:

```toml
Listen = "0.0.0.0:8075"         # Edit appropriately
Psk    = "bf82bab384697243fbf616d3428477a563e33268f0f2307dd14e7245dd8c995d"
SignPk = "0c41ca9b0a1b5fe4daae789534e72329a93a352a6ad73d6f1d368d8eff37271c"

# Optional streaming limits (defaults shown):
# MaxStreamBytes    = 10737418240   # 10 GiB
# MaxStreamDuration = 86400         # 24 hours, in seconds
# MaxWaitingPullers = 100
```

Sample configuration file for clients:

```toml
Connect   = "127.0.0.1:8075"    # Edit appropriately
Psk       = "bf82bab384697243fbf616d3428477a563e33268f0f2307dd14e7245dd8c995d"
SignPk    = "0c41ca9b0a1b5fe4daae789534e72329a93a352a6ad73d6f1d368d8eff37271c"
SignSk    = "cecf1d92052f7ba87da36ac3e4a745b64ade8f9e908e52b4f7cd41235dfe7481"
EncryptSk = "2f530eb85e59c1977fce726df9f87345206f2a3d40bf91f9e0e9eeec2c59a3e4"
```

Do not use these, uh? Get your very own keys with the `piknik -genkeys` command.
Edit the `Connect` and `Listen` properties to reflect the staging server IP and port.
And `chmod 600 ~/.piknik.toml` might not be a bad idea.

Don't like the default config file location? Use the `-config` switch.

## Usage (staging server)

Run the following command on the staging server (or use `runit`, `openrc`, `systemd`, whatever to run it as a background service):

```sh
piknik -server
```

The staging server has to be publicly accessible. At the very least, it must be reachable by the clients over TCP with the port you specify in the configuration.

Commands without a valid API key (present in the client configuration file) will be rejected by the server.

## Usage (clients)

```sh
piknik -copy
```

Copy the standard input to the clipboard.

```sh
piknik -paste
```

Retrieve the content of the clipboard and spit it to the standard output.
`-paste` is actually a no-op. This is the default action if `-copy` was not specified.

```sh
piknik -move
```

Retrieve the content of the clipboard, spit it to the standard output
and clear the clipboard. Not necessarily in this order.
Only one lucky client will have the privilege to see the content.

That's it.

Feed it anything. Text, binary data, whatever. As long as it fits in memory.

## Streaming mode

Piknik also supports real-time streaming between hosts. One or more receivers connect and wait, then a sender streams data that all receivers get simultaneously.

Start a receiver on one or more hosts:

```sh
piknik -pull > received_data
```

Then stream from the sender:

```sh
piknik -push < data_to_send
```

Or pipe a live process:

```sh
tar cf - /important/stuff | piknik -push
```

All connected receivers get the same stream. Only one sender can be active at a time.

Streaming works like copy/paste: everything is end-to-end encrypted and signed. The server just relays opaque bytes.

### Content identifiers

The optional `-cid` flag binds a label into the stream's key derivation, so both sides must agree on the same value for decryption to succeed:

```sh
piknik -pull -cid "deploy-v42" > payload    # receiver
piknik -push -cid "deploy-v42" < payload    # sender
```

The label is never sent over the wire. If the sender and receiver use different labels, the receiver will fail with a decryption error.

The `PIKNIK_CONTENT_ID` environment variable can be used instead of `-cid`.

### Trust model

Stream output should be considered tentative until the process exits with code 0. A zero exit status means all chunks were authenticated via AEAD and the complete stream signature was verified. A non-zero exit means the stream was incomplete or tampered with. Pipelines should check the exit status before trusting the output.

## Suggested shell aliases

Wait. Where are the `pkc` and `pkp` commands mentioned earlier?

Sample shell aliases:

```sh
# pko <content> : copy <content> to the clipboard
pko() {
    echo "$*" | piknik -copy
}

# pkf <file> : copy the content of <file> to the clipboard
pkf() {
    piknik -copy < $1
}

# pkc : read the content to copy to the clipboard from STDIN
alias pkc='piknik -copy'

# pkp : paste the clipboard content
alias pkp='piknik -paste'

# pkm : move the clipboard content
alias pkm='piknik -move'

# pkz : delete the clipboard content
alias pkz='piknik -copy < /dev/null'

# pkfr [<dir>] : send a whole directory to the clipboard, as a tar archive
pkfr() {
    tar czpvf - ${1:-.} | piknik -copy
}

# pkpr : extract clipboard content sent using the pkfr command
alias pkpr='piknik -paste | tar xzpvf -'

# pkpush : stream stdin to connected pullers
alias pkpush='piknik -push'

# pkpull : wait and receive a stream to stdout
alias pkpull='piknik -pull'
```

## Piknik integration in third-party packages

* The [Piknik package for Atom](https://atom.io/packages/piknik)
allows copying/pasting text between hosts running the Atom text editor.
* The [Piknik package for Visual Studio Code](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=jedisct1.piknik)
allows copying/pasting text between hosts running the Visual Studio Code text editor.

## Use cases

Use it to:

* Securely send passwords, API keys, URLs from one host to another
* Share a clipboard with your teammates (which can be a lot of fun)
* Copy data from/to isolated VMs, without the VMWare tools or shared volumes (great for unsupported operating systems and malware sandboxes)
* Copy files from/to a Windows machine, without Samba or SSH
* Transfer data between hosts sitting behind firewalls/NAT gateways
* Easily copy configuration files to multiple hosts
* Start a slow download at the office, retrieve it later at home
* Quickly backup a file to the cloud before messing with it
* ...and more!

## Protocol

### Common definitions

```text
k: API key
ek: 256-bit symmetric encryption key
ekid: encryption key id encoded as a 64-bit little endian integer
m: plaintext
ct: XChaCha20 ek,n (m)
Hk,s: BLAKE2b(domain="PK", key=k, salt=s, size=32)
Len(x): x encoded as a 64-bit little endian unsigned integer
n: random 192-bit nonce
r: random 256-bit client nonce
r': random 256-bit server nonce
ts: Unix timestamp as a 64-bit little endian integer
Sig: Ed25519
v: 6 (copy/paste/move), 7 (streaming)
```

### Copy (v6)

```text
-> v || r || h0
h0 := Hk,0(v || r)

<- v || r' || h1
h1 := Hk,1(v || r' || h0)

-> 'S' || h2 || Len(ekid || n || ct) || ts || s || ekid || n || ct
s := Sig(ekid || n || ct)
h2 := Hk,2(h1 || 'S' || ts || s)

<- Hk,3(h2)
```

### Move/Paste (v6)

```text
Move:  opcode := 'M'
Paste: opcode := 'G'

-> v || r || h0
h0 := Hk,0(v || r)

<- v || r' || h1
h1 := Hk,1(v || r' || H0)

-> opcode || h2
h2 := Hk,2(h1 || opcode)

<- Hk,3(h2 || ts || s) || Len(ekid || n || ct) || ts || s || ekid || n || ct
s := Sig(ekid || n || ct)
```

### Streaming (v7)

Streaming uses protocol version 7. The handshake is the same as v6, but the
opcode is `P` (push) or `L` (pull) and the data flow is chunked.

Additional definitions:

```text
AEAD: XChaCha20-Poly1305
np: random 128-bit nonce prefix (also serves as stream identifier)
streamKey: BLAKE2b-256(key=ek, person="pkv7-stream-key",
           input=ts || ekid || np || uint16(len(cid)) || cid)
chunkNonce(i): np || uint64_le(i)     (24 bytes)
cidBind: BLAKE2b-256(key=ek, person="pk-v7-cid-bind",
         input=uint16(len(cid)) || cid)    if cid present
         32 zero bytes                     if cid absent
```

Push (sender):

```text
-> v=7 || r || h0                       (handshake)
<- v=7 || r' || h1

-> 'P' || h2                            (opcode auth)
h2 := Hk,2(h1 || 'P')

<- status                               (1 byte: 0x01=accepted,
                                          0x00=no pullers, 0x02=busy)

-> ts || ekid || np                     (stream header, 32 bytes)

-> uint32_le(len) || AEAD.Seal(streamKey, chunkNonce(0), chunk0)
-> uint32_le(len) || AEAD.Seal(streamKey, chunkNonce(1), chunk1)
...                                     (data frames, len=1..65536)

-> uint32_le(0) || Sig(transcriptHash)  (end frame)
```

The server rejects the push immediately if no pullers are waiting or another
push is already active. The sender receives a distinct status code for each
case and can report a meaningful error without transmitting any data.

Pull (receiver):

```text
-> v=7 || r || h0                       (handshake)
<- v=7 || r' || h1

-> 'L' || h2                            (opcode auth, then wait)
h2 := Hk,2(h1 || 'L')

<- ts || ekid || np                     (stream header)
<- uint32_le(len) || sealed_chunk       (data frames)
...
<- uint32_le(0) || signature            (end frame)
```

The transcript hash covers:

```text
transcriptHash := BLAKE2b-256(person="pk-v7-transcript",
    v(1) || 'P'(1) || ts(8) || ekid(8) || np(16) || cidBind(32)
    || for each chunk: chunkIndex(8) || chunkLen(4) || sealedChunk(len+16)
)
```

All integers are little-endian. The content identifier (`-cid`) is never
transmitted on the wire; it is bound into key derivation and the transcript
hash so that both sides must agree on the same label.

## License

[ISC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISC_license).

## Credits

Piknik diagram by [EasyPi](https://easypi.herokuapp.com/copy-paste-anything-over-network/).
